>> Woodruff: A DARKER SIDE TO
THE BEAUTIFUL GAME.
NINE OFFICIALS FROM SOCCER'S
INTERNATIONAL GOVERNING BODY ARE
INDICTED FOR CORRUPTION.
WE LOOK AT THE CONSEQUENCES,
JUST WEEKS BEFORE THE WOMEN'S
WORLD CUP KICKS OFF IN CANADA.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY:
RAIN CONTINUES TO FALL IN TEXAS,
DEEPENING FLOODWATERS AND
DISRUPTING THE SEARCH FOR THOSE
MISSING.
AND NOW, NEW QUESTIONS ABOUT
WHETHER THE STATE WAS PREPARED.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, THE STRUGGLE
TO FIND HOMES FOR ORPHANS IN
MOROCCO, A COUNTRY WHERE AN
ESTIMATED 24 CHILDREN ARE
ABANDONED EVERY DAY.
ABANDONED EVERY DAY. >>
(translated): FOR THE
>> (translated): FOR
THE CHILDREN WE FIND WHO ARE
OLDER
CHILDREN WE FIND WHO ARE OLDER
THAN AGE TWO, WE BELIEVE THEIR
MOTHERS TRIED TO KEEP THEIR
BABIES WITH THEM, BUT BECAUSE
THEY ARE REJECTED BY THEIR
FAMILIES AND ARE UNABLE TO FIND
A JOB, THEY DECIDED TO ABANDON
THE CHILD.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: AUTHORITIES IN BOTH
THE U.S. AND SWITZERLAND
LAUNCHED CORRUPTION PROBES INTO
SOCCER'S GOVERNING BODY, FIFA.
U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL LORETTA
LYNCH CALLED THE CORRUPTION
"RAMPANT" AND "DEEP-ROOTED,"
INVOLVING BRIBES IN EXCESS OF
$150 MILLION.
WE'LL HAVE MUCH MORE ON THIS
RIGHT AFTER THIS NEWS SUMMARY.
>> Woodruff: IN IRAQ, ISLAMIC
STATE MILITANTS ORCHESTRATED A
WAVE OF SUICIDE ATTACKS AGAINST
IRAQI ARMY TARGETS TODAY.
AT LEAST 17 TROOPS WERE KILLED
OUTSIDE FALLUJAH, WHERE THEY
WERE TRYING TO WREST BACK
CONTL FRROOM THE MILITANTS.
MEANWHILE, FIGHTING RAGED IN A
TOWN CLOSER TO RAMADI, WHICH WAS
CAPTURED BY ISLAMIC STATE
INSURGENTS EARLIER THIS MONTH.
IRAQI FORCES AND SUNNI TRIBESMEN
FORCED FIGHTERS TO RETREAT,
USING GUNS AND ROCKETS.
>> Ifill: A RELENTLESS HEAT WAVE
IN INDIA HAS CLAIMED THE LIVES
OF MORE THAN 1,100 PEOPLE IN THE
PAST MONTH.
MOST OF THE VICTIMS HAVE BEEN IN
THE SOUTHEASTERN PART OF THE
COUNTRY, WHERE SCORCHING
TEMPERATURES ARE HOVERING AROUND
113 DEGREES.
HOSPITALS HAVE BEEN FLOODED WITH
COMMUNITIES HAVE SET UP
DISTRIBUTION CENTERS FOR COLD
DRINKS.
OFFICIALS ARE WARNING RESIDENTS
TO TAKE CARE OUTSIDE.
TO TAKE CARE OUTSIDE. >> (
translated): OUR DOCTORS
>> (translated): OUR
DOCTORS AND PARAMEDIC STAFF HAVE
BEEN
AND PARAMEDIC STAFF HAVE BEEN
GOING OUTSIDE AND MAKING PEOPLE
AWARE THAT THEY SHOULD NOT WORK
OUTSIDE IN THE SUN.
THEY ARE ALSO TELLING PEOPLE
THAT IF THEY HAVE TO STEP OUT
DURING THE DAY THEN THEY SHOULD
TAKE PRECAUTIONS AND USE A CAP
OR SOMETHING TO COVER THEIR
HEAD.
PEOPLE SHOULD TRY AND WEAR
COTTON AND LOOSE CLOTHING.
>> Ifill: FORECASTERS ANTICIPATE
THE STIFLING HEAT WILL CONTINUE
FOR AT LEAST ANOTHER WEEK.
>> Woodruff: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCED NEW
RULES TODAY TO PROTECT THE
NATION'S DRINKING WATER.
THE GUIDELINES, ISSUED BY THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
AND THE ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS,
CLARIFY WHICH SMALL STREAMS AND
WATERWAYS WILL BE PROTECTED
UNDER THE CLEAN WATER ACT.
THEY ALSO SEEK TO ENSURE THAT
POLLUTERS WILL BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE.
E.P.A. ADMINISTRATOR GINA
McCARTHY MADE THE ANNOUNCEMENT
TODAY ON THE BANKS OF THE
ANACOSTIA RIVER IN WASHINGTON.
>> RIVERS AND LAKES WE LOVE, WE
JUST CAN'T LET THEM GET
POLLUTED.
WE HAVE TO PAY ATTENTION TO
THESE STREAMS AND WETLANDS THAT
FEED INTO THESE WATERWAYS
BECAUSE IF THEY'RE NOT CLEAN,
THIS WILL NOT BE EITHER.
AND ONE IN THREE AMERICANS GET
DRINKING WATER FROM STREAMS AND
WETLANDS THAT LACK CLEAR
PROTECTION, UP UNTIL YESTERDAY.
>> Woodruff: THE NEW RULES HAVE
ALSO TRIGGERED OPPOSITION.
FARMERS ARE CONCERNED STREAMS ON
PRIVATE LAND WILL NOW BE SUBJECT
TO FEDERAL OVERSIGHT.
AND THE REPUBLICAN-LED HOUSE AND
SENATE ARE TAKING LEGISLATIVE
ACTION TO BLOCK THE REGULATIONS.
LAWMAKERS ABOLISHED THE
DEATH PENALTY OVERRIDING THE
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR TO DO
IT.
THE ONE HOUSE LEGISLATURE
VOTED 130-1920 GET RID OF
CAPITAL PUNISH AM.
THE VOTE WAS LEAD BY A
COALITION OF CONSERVATIVE
WAS OPPOSE CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT ON FISCAL
GROUNDS.
IT MAKES NEBRASKA THE FIRST
TRADITIONALLY CONSERVATIVE
STATE TO OUTLAW THE DEATH
PENALTY SINCE NORTH DAKOTA
DID IT IN 197 .
>> THE INTERNAL REVENUE
SERVICE BELIEVED THAT
RUSSIAN HACKERS ARE TO BLAME
FOR STEALING PERSONAL TAX
INFORMATION TO MORE THAN
100,000 TAXPAYERS.
THAT IS ACCORDING TO THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS CITING
ANONYMOUS SOURCES.
THE AGENCY SAID THE IDENTITY
THIEVES USED SOPHISTICATED
METHODS TO GET TAX RETURN
INFORMATION FROM FEBRUARY TO
MID-MAY.
>> DATA
>> Ifill: DATA BREACHES ARE
COSTING COMPANIES AROUND THE
WORLD MORE AND MORE EACH YEAR.
A STUDY BY THE PONEMON INSTITUTE
FOUND THE AVERAGE COST OF A DATA
BREACH IS NOW $3.8 MILLION.
THE COSTS INCLUDE HIRING EXPERTS
TO FIX THE BREACH, INVESTIGATING
THE CAUSE AND PUTTING HOTLINES
IN PLACE FOR CUSTOMERS.
SONY, J.P. MORGAN CHASE, TARGET
AND HOME DEPOT ALL FACED
SIGNIFICANT HACKS OVER THE LAST
YEAR AND A HALF.
>> Woodruff: ON WALL STREET
TODAY, STOCKS RECOVERED FROM A
SLUMP DA
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 121 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
18,163.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 70
POINTS, AND THE S&P 500 ADDED 19
POINTS.
THE 2016 REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
FIELD IS UP TO SEVEN CANDIDATES.
FORMER PENNSYLVANIA SENATOR AND
2012 REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CONTENDER RICK SANTORUM
ANNOUNCED HE TOO IS RUNNING FOR
PRESIDENT.
SANTORUM OFFICIALLY ENTERED THE
FRAY IN THE SMALL TOWN OF CABOT,
PENNSYLVANIA THIS AFTERNOON.
>> YOU CAN'T SIT IDLY BY AS
BIG GOVERNMENT POLITICIANS
MAKE IT HARDER FOR OUR
WORKERS, AND THEN TURN
AROUND AND BLAME THEM FOR
LOSING JOBS OVERSEAS.
WORKING FAMILIES DON'T NEED
ANOTHER PRESIDENT TIED TO
BIG GOVERNMENT OR BIG MONEY.
AND TODAY IS THE DAY, TODAY
IS THE DAY WE ARE GOING TO
BEGIN TO FIGHT BACK.
>> Ifill: SANTORUM WILL KICK OFF
HIS CAMPAIGN WITH STOPS IN THE
EARLY PRIMARY STATES OF IOWA AND
SOUTH CAROLINA.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR:
SOCCER OFFICIALS GET HIT WITH
CORRUPTION CHARGES.
MORE RAIN FOR AN ALREADY FLOOD-
RAVAGED TEXAS.
ONE WOMAN'S JOURNEY, FLEEING
SYRIA FOR EUROPE.
IMPROVING DIVERSITY IN ADVANCED
PLACEMENT CLASSES.
TRYING TO FIND HOMES FOR
MOROCCO'S ABANDONED CHILDREN.
AND, ART THAT STRETCHES THE
BOUNDARIES OF IMAGINATION.
>> Ifill: THE INDICTMENTS OF
OFFICIALS AT SOCCER'S
INTERNATIONAL GOVERNING BODY
WERE A STUNNING BLOW TO THE
SPORT, AND PROSECUTORS PROMISED
IT IS JUST THE BEGINNING.
IT'S THE WORLD'S MOST POPULAR
SPORT, RUN BY A POWERFUL GROUP
THAT RAKES IN BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS.
BUT THE U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL
AND FBI DIRECTOR SAY "THE
BEAUTIFUL GAME" IS ALSO INVOLVED
IN SOME DIRTY BUSINESS.
THEY SPOKE THIS MORNING IN
BROOKLYN:
>> WE ARE HERE TO ANNOUNCE THE
UNSEALING OF CHARGES AND THE
ARREST OF INDIVIDUALS AS PART OF
OUR LONG-RUNNING INVESTIGATION
INTO BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION IN
THE WORLD OF ORGANIZED SOCCER.
>> Ifill: THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT'S 47-COUNT INDICTMENT
CHARGED 14 PEOPLE: NINE OF
INTERNATIONAL SOCCER'S TOP
OFFICIALS AND FIVE SPORTS
MARKETING EXECUTIVES.
THE CHARGES INCLUDE
RACKETEERING, WIRE FRAUD, MONEY
LAUNDERING, AND OTHER OFFENSES.
IT'S A CASE THAT INVOLVES MORE
THAN $150 MILLION IN BRIBES,
DOLED OUT OVER DECADES, FOR
MEDIA AND MARKETING RIGHTS TO
VARIOUS TOURNAMENTS.
JUST HOURS BEFORE THE U.S.
AUTHORITIES SPOKE, SWISS POLICE
EMTERED A LUXURY HOTEL IN
ZURICH, AND ARRESTED SEVEN FIFA
OFFICIALS, WHO WILL BE
EXTRADITED TO THE U.S.
>> THEY WERE EXPECTED TO UPHOLD
THE RULES THAT KEEP SOCCER
HONEST AND TO PROTECT THE
INTEGRITY OF THE GAME.
INSTEAD, THEY CORRUPTED THE
BUSINESS OF WORLDWIDE SOCCER TO
SERVE THEIR INTERESTS AND TO
ENRICH THEMSELVES.
>> Ifill: FIFA PRESIDENT JOSEPH
"SEPP" BLATTER SAID, IN A
STATEMENT:
"SUCH MISCONDUCT HAS NO PLACE IN
FOOTBALL AND WE WILL ENSURE THAT
THOSE WHO ENGAGE IN IT ARE PUT
OUT OF THE GAME."
BLATTER WILL SEEK RE-ELECTION TO
A FIFTH TERM FRIDAY; EUROPE'S
MAIN SOCCER FEDERATION HAS
CALLED FOR A POSTPONEMENT.
BLATTER, WHOSE 17-YEAR RULE HAS
BEEN MARRED BY CORRUPTION
SCANDALS, IS NOT CHARGED IN THE
U.S. INDICTMENT.
AMONG THOSE WHO WERE INDICTED:
JEFFREY WEBB AND JACK WARNER,
FORMER PRESIDENTS OF CONCACAF,
WHICH RUNS SOCCER IN NORTH AND
CENTRAL AMERICA AND THE
CARRIBEAN.
FBI AGENTS SEARCHED THAT
ORGANIZATION'S MIAMI
HEADQUARTERS TODAY.
FBI DIRECTOR COMEY SPOKE IN NEW
YORK:
>> THE GAME, ACCORDING TO THE
ALLEGATIONS IN THIS INDICTMENT,
WAS HIJACKED.
THAT FIELD THAT IS SO FAMOUSLY
FLAT WAS MADE TILTED IN FAVOR OF
THOSE WHO WERE LOOKING TO GAIN
AT THE EXPENSE OF COUNTRIES AND
KIDS WHO WERE ENJOYING THE GAME
OF SOCCER.
>> Ifill: CHARLES BLAZER, A
FORMER U.S. REPRESENTATIVE ON
FIFA'S EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, WAS
ONE OF FOUR PEOPLE WHO'S ALREADY
PLEADED GUILTY.
HE'D BEEN HELPING THE FBI SINCE
LEAVING SOCCER IN 2013.
AFTER THE U.S. ANNOUNCEMENT,
SWISS PROSECUTORS OPENED THEIR
OWN CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS INTO
THE HIGHLY-CRITICIZED DECISIONS
TO AWARD THE 2018 WORLD CUP TO
RUSSIA, AND THE 2022 WORLD CUP
TO QATAR.
>> Ifill: I AM JOINED NOW BY TWO
REPORTERS WHO'VE BEEN FOLLOWING
THESE EVENTS CLOSELY.
JEREMY SCHAAP OF ESPN, WHO
RECENTLY RELEASED A DOCUMENTARY
EXPLORING CORRUPTION INSIDE
FIFA, AND MATT APUZZO.
HE'S BEEN COVERING THE LEGAL
SIDE OF THE STORY FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES...
>> HOW IS IT THAT YOU U.S.
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, THE US
FBI GOT INVOLVED IN THE
INDICTMENTS AND ARRESTS THE
REST OF THE INVESTIGATION.
>> AMERICAN LAW GIVES THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT BROAD
LATITUDE TO TARGET FOREIGN
NATIONAL AS BROAD, WITH JUST
THE SLIGHTEST NEXUS TO THE
UNITED STATES.
IN THIS CASE THERE WERE SOME
MEETINGS HELD IN THE UNITED
STATES.
AND MOST SIGNIFICANTLY, FOR
PROSECUTORS AND AGENTS IN
NEW YORK, IS THE ALLEGATIONS
ARE THAT FIFA OFFICIALS USED
THE AMERICAN BANKING SYSTEM
AS PART OF THIS CORRUPT
SCHEME.
SO THAT GIVES THEM THE HOOK
THEY NEED TO BRING THESE
CHARGES.
>> Ifill: JEREMY SCHAAP, YOU
HAVE DONE QUITE A GREAT DEAL
OF WORK LOOK NAG FIFA.
TELL US WHETHER IF FIFA AT
ITS ROOT IS A SPORTS
ORGANIZATION OR KIND OF A
GLOBAL FINANCIAL POWERHOUSE.
>> OR A CRIMINAL ENTERPRISE
WHICH IS PRETTY MUCH WHAT
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
WAS ALLEGING TODAY IN THAT
EXTRAORDINARY PRESS
CONFERENCE IN BROOKLYN.
I THINK PEOPLE WHO HAVE EVEN
A CASUAL UNDERSTANDING OF
WHAT FIFA REPRESENTS
ASSOCIATE IT WITH CORRUPTION
AND CRONYISM AND A LACK OF
TRANSPARENCY.
BUT IT'S QUITE DIFFERENT TO
HEAR THAT COMING OUT OF THE
MOUTHS OF THE AMERICAN
GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES,
THE DIRECTOR OF THE FBI.
MAKE NO MISTAKE, FIFA HAS
WEATHERED SCANDAL AFTER
SCANDAL PARTICULARLY OVER
THE COURSE OF THE LAST 17
YEARS AS SETH BLATTER OF
SWITZERLAND HAS BEEN ITS
PRESIDENT.
BUT I THINK THIS IS A
WATERSHED MOMENT.
>> Ifill: TELL US A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT SETH BLATTER.
>> HE HAS BEEN PRESIDENT FOR
17 YEARS.
HE IS RUNNING FOR
RE-ELECTION FRIDAY, THAT WAB
HIS FIHFT TERM AFTER
PROMISING NOT TO RUN FOR
RE-ELECTION WHEN HE RAN FOR
A FOURTH TERM FOUR YEARS
AGO.
HE HAS BEEN AT FIFA FOR FOUR
YEARS.
HE JOINED THE ORGANIZATION
IN 1975 WHEN HE WAS ONE OF
12 EMPLOYEES.
AND OVER THE YRSEA HE'S
DEMONSTRATED A REMARKABLE
APTITUDE FOR THE POLITICAL
ASPECT OF HIS JOB.
AND BY THAT I MEAN HE HAS
WORKED VERY EFFECTIVELY AT
PERPETUATING HIS OWN POWER.
ANYONE YOU TALK TO ABOUT HIM,
WHO KNOWS HIM WELL, WILL
TELL YOU HE IS HIGHLY
INTELLIGENT, THAT HE CAN BE
CHARMING.
BUT IT'S CLEAR THAT HIS
STEWARDSHIP OF THIS
ORGANIZATION HAS BEEN, TO
PUT IT GENEROUSLY, LAX IN
ETHICAL TERMS.
>> WE CAN REPEAT T WOULDN'T
HURT TO REPEAT THAT HE WAS
NOT CHARGED WITH ANYTHING
TODAY.
MATT APUZZO, OF THE 14 WHO
WERE CHARGED TODAY, TELL US
A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THEM AND
ALSO ABOUT THE CHARGES.
ARE THEY BASICALLY BEING
CHARGED WITH RIGGING THE
GAME?
>> YOU KNOW, THEY'RE TO THE
BEING CHARGED WITH RIGGING
THE GAME OF SOCCER.
THEY'RE BEING CHARGED WITH
RIGGING THE BUSINESS OF
SOCCER.
AND JEREMY'S POINT IS SPOT
ON.
IS THIS A SPORTING GROUP.
IS THIS A GLOBAL CONGLOM
RALT, OR IS A CRIMINAL
ENTERPRISE.
THE WAY LORETTA LYNCH AND
JIM COMEY TALKED ABOUT FIFA,
THEY USED TERMS, THEY USED
CHARGES THAT NORMALLY ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH THE MAFIA OR
MEXICAN DRUG CARTELS.
BASICALLY THE IDEA IS FIFA
HAS OVER A BILLION DOLLARS
IN CASH RESERVES.
THEY GENERATE BETWEEN A
BILLION AND $2 BILLION IN
REVENUE EF YEE-- EVERY YEAR.
IF YOU WANT A PIECE OF THAT,
IF YOU WANT TO BE ASSOCIATED
WITH THE MONEY AND PRESTIGE
OF THE WORLD CUP AND
INTERNATIONAL SOCCER, YOU'VE
GOT TO PAY.
AND YOU KNOW, THE INDICTMENT
JUST TALKED ABOUT, YOU KNOW,
SENIOR FIFA OFFICIALS WHO
HAVE THE VOTE ON WHERE THE
WORLD CUP IS GOING TO GO, AN
THEY'RE SHOPPING IT AROUND
TO THE HIGHEST BIDDER.
SO ONE COUNTRY WILL GIVE YOU
A MILLION DOLLARS, ONE
COUNTRY WILL GIVE ME $10
MILLION.
I MEAN IT WAS JUST
REMARKABLE TO READ HOW
EXPLICIT THIS STUFF WAS.
>> Ifill: AND MATT, I
REMEMBER THE-- I'M NOT THAT
CLOSE A SOCCER FAN BUT I
REMEMBER THE CAT QATAR WHICH
HAS NO CULTURE FOR
SOMETHINGER GOT THE WORLD
CUP FOR SEVERAL YEARS HENCE,
BUT STILL PEM WERE REALLY
SURPRISED.
IS THERE A SUSPICION THAT
THAT WAS RUGGED?
>> WELL, I MEAN, THE
SUSPICION ON THE 2018 AND
2022 WORLD CUPS IN RUSSIA
AND QATAR, I MEAN, HAS JUST
PLAGUED FIFA FOR YEARS.
BUT WHAT IS REMARKABLE IS
WHILE THE SWISS ARE
INVESTIGATING THOSE TWO, THE
UNITED STATES DIDN'T COME
DOWN-- THOSE BIDS WERE NOT
PART OF THIS INVESTIGATION.
INSTEAD, THEY WENT BACK 20
YEARS AND SAID THIS IS A
SYSTEMIC PROBLEM THAT'S NOT
LIMITED TO JUST ONE OR TWO
WORLD CUP SELECTIONS.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK JEREMY
SCHAAP ABOUT THAT.
THIS IF THIS HAS BEEN GOING
ON SO LONG, IF THERE HAVE
BEEN THIS MANY SUSPICIONS
OVER THE YEARS ABOUT THE WAY
THAT BUSINESSES WITH BEING
DONE AT FIFA, WHY IS IT JUST
RISING TO THE LEVEL OF
INDICTMENTS NOW IF.
>> WELL, I THINK JIM COMEY
ADDRESSED THAT A LITTLE BIT
DURING THE PRESS CONFERENCE.
A LOT OF IT IS ABOUT
JURISDICTION.
A LOT OF IT IS ABOUT THE
FACT THAT FIFA OPERATES
UNDER SWISS LAW AS
ESSENTIALLY NOTHING MORE
THAN A NONPROFIT, LIKE A
YODELING ASSOCIATION, THAT'S
OFTEN THE ANALOGY THAT IS
THROWN OUT THERE SO THIS
MULTIBILLION-DOLLAR
CONGLOMERATE, YOU COULD CALL
IT, WHICH HAS SO MANY
INTERESTS AND SO MANY
ASPECTS MUCH GLOBAL SOCCER,
REALLY DOESN'T HAVE ANY
OVERARCHING OVERSIGHT FROM
THE SWISS GOVERNMENT.
WE DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT ITS
WORKINGS.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO PUBLISH
ITS MINUTES.
WE DON'T KNOW THE SALARIES
OF ITS EMPLOYEES.
IT'S BEEN ABLE TO OPERATE
UNDER THIS VEIL OF SECRECY.
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF
DECADES, SWITZERLAND HAS
BEEN TRYING TO CHANGE ITS
IMAGE IT DOESN'T WANT TO BE
CONSIDERED ANY MORE THE
PLACE WHERE DICTATORS AND
CRIMINALS HIDE THEIR MONEY.
AND FIFA HAS BECOME AN
EMBARRASSMENT AND SETH
BLAERT TOO AN EXTENT HAS
BECOME AN EMBARRASSMENT TO
SWITZERLAND.
SO THE FACT THAT THE
SITUATION COOPERATED AND
WORK HAND-IN-HAND WITH THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
AND ARE CONDUCTING THEIR OWN
INVESTIGATION, I THINK THE
RESPONSE OF THAT CANNOT BE
OVER-- THE IMPORTANCE OF
THAT CANNOT BE OVERSTATED
AND ONCE THE SWISS DETERMINE
THEY ARE GOING TO OVERSEE
FIFA AND THE IOC IN A
DIFFERENT WAY, THAT MIGHT
FORCE THEM TO BE MORE
ACCOUNTABLE.
>> Ifill: MATT, IT SOUNDS
THAT THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
TODAY THAT THIS IS THE
BEGINNING OF AN
INVESTIGATION, NOT THE END.
>> YEAH, REALLY REMARKABLE.
IT'S PAR FOR THE COURSE FOR
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT TO
SAY THE INVESTIGATION IS
ONGOING.
BUT I MEAN, PROSECUTORS SORT
OF LAID DOWN THE MARKER
HERE.
THEY SAID THIS IS THE
BEGINNING, NOT THE END.
AND WE ARE GOING TO ROOT OUT
CORRUPTION FROM
INTERNATIONAL SOCCER.
YOU KNOW, ESPECIALLY FOR A
NEW ATTORNEY GENERAL TO COME
IN AND LAY DOWN THAT MARKER,
WITH 18 MONTHS TO GO IN HER
TENURE, IT WASN'T JUST THE
WELL, YOU KNOW, MORE CHARGES
COULD COME BECAUSE THE
INVESTIGATION IS ONGOING.
THEY WENT THERE TODAY.
THEY WENT TO NEW YORK TO
SEND THE MESSAGE TO
INTERNATIONAL SOCCER.
YOU HAVEN'T CLEANED UP YOUR
HOUSE.
WE ARE COMING TO CLEAN UP
YOUR HOUSE.
>> Ifill: MATT APUZZO OF
"THE NEW YORK TIMES"S,
JEREMY SCHAAP OF ESPN, THANK
YOU BOTH FOR YOUR WORK.
>> GREAT.
>> THANK YOU
>> Woodruff: STORMS AND FLOODS
HAVE MADE THIS AN
EXTRAORDINARILY DIFFICULT WEEK
IN PARTS OF THE MIDWEST AND THE
PLAINS.
THAT'S BEEN ESPECIALLY TRUE IN
HOUSTON WHERE THE COUNTRY'S
FOURTH LARGEST CITY HAS BEEN
HAMMERED, AND OTHER PARTS OF
TEXAS THAT HAVE BEEN UNDER
WATER.
TODAY BROUGHT YET ANOTHER DAY OF
STRUGGLE AND ANXIETY TO THE
REGION.
CREWS RACED TO PUMP WATER FROM
PADERA LAKE, TRYING TO PREVENT
ITS EARTHEN DAM FROM BURSTING,
AND SENDING A WALL OF WATER
TOWARDS DOZENS OF HOMES IN
MIDLOTHIAN, TEXAS, 25 MILES
SOUTHWEST OF DALLAS.
THE DAM HELD, FOR NOW, BUT
POLICE STILL ASKED RESIDENTS TO
EVACUATE.
WHILE IN HOUSTON, THE NATIONAL
WEATHER SERVICE ISSUED ANOTHER
FLOOD RNINWAG FOR A CITY
ALREADY-SOAKED.
THIS FOLLOWED ANOTHER STORMY
NIGHT IN THE HARD-HIT LONE STAR
STATE, AND THROUGHOUT THE
CENTRAL PLAINS AND OHIO RIVER
VALLEY.
LIGHTNING LIT UP THE SKIES OF
FORT WORTH, WHILE IN OHIO, A
TORNADO CHURNED THROUGH THE
SMALL TOWN OF BEAVERCREEK.
TODAY, OKLAHOMA GOVERNOR MARY
FALLIN TOURED AREAS OF HER STATE
RAVAGED BY FLOS ANODD SEVERE
STORMS OVER THE WEEKEND.
>> IT'S BEEN A VERY CHALLENGING
WEEK FOR ALL OF OUR EMERGENCY
RESPONDERS AND OUR STATE OFFICE
BECAUSE THERE'S SO MANY COUNTIES
THAT WE HAVE TO COVER.
THERE'S SO MANY PEOPLE CALLING.
I KNOW MY PHONE RANG ALL WEEKEND
BECAUSE OF ALL THE PEOPLE
REPORTING DAMAGES AND CONRNCE
ABOUT WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO AS
A STATE?
>> Woodruff: AND THE SEARCH
RESUMED IN SAN MARCOS, TEXAS,
WHERE THE BLANCO RIVER SURGED
NEARLY 45 FEET LATE SATURDAY,
KILLING AT LEAST THREE PEOPLE,IN
OTHERS.
>> WE ARE STILL IN SEARCH AND
RESCUE MODE, WE ARE STILL
LOOKING FOR VIABLE VICTIMS.
It doesn't' take much, we are
saturated folks.
THE ISOLATED THUNDERSTORMS COULD
CASE IMMEDIATE LOCAL FLOODING IN
YOUR AREA.
I CAN'T STRESS IT ENOUGH.
WE'RE TO A POINT WHERE WE'RE
MISSING 11 PEOPLE.
WE DON'T NEED ANYMORe.
>> Woodruff: ALL THIS, AS
RESIDENTS OF HOUSTON BATTLED
STILL-FLOODED STREETS AND BRACED
FOR MORE RAIN IN COMING DAYS.
CITY OFFICIALS SAID LATE TODAY
THAT SIX PEOPLE HAVE DIED FROM
THE FLOODING SO FAR.
LET'S GET AN ON-THE-GROUND
UPDATE ON THE PROBLEMS IN
HOUSTON AND THE EFFORTS TO DEAL
WITH THE FLOODS.
REPORTER MOLLY HENNESSY-FISK IS
BASED THERE FOR THE "LOS ANGELES
TIMES" AND JOINS ME NOW.
WELCOME
TO THE NEWSHOUR, SO WHAT IS
THE LATEST ON THE FLOODING
SITUATION AND ON THE
CASUALTIES?
>> WELL, JUDY, THANKS FOR
HAVING ME.
WE HAVE THE DEATH TOLL HAS
RISEN TO ABOUT 19 IN TEXAS
AND OKLAHOMA.
BUT THEY'RE ALSO STILL
SEARCHING FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE
MISSING, AS YOU MENTIONED.
WE HAVE SOME PEOPLE WHO ARE
MISSING IN HOUSTON FROM THE
FLOODING HERE.
BUT THEN ALSO IN CENTRAL
TEXAS, STILL, FROM FLOODING
THAT HAPPENED OVER THE
HOLIDAY WEEKEND.
>> Woodruff: AN WHAT ABOUT
THE FLOODING SITUATION, I
MEAN HOW BAD, HOW HIGH IS
THE WATER, HOW BIG A THREAT?
>> WELL, THE WATER GOT
PRETTY HIGH.
WE HAD ALMOST A FOOT OF
RAINFALL OVERNIGHT INTO
TUESDAY MORNING.
AND SO YESTERDAY WAS A BIG
DAY FOR PEOPLE, YOU KNOW,
KAYAKING IN THE STREETS AND
TRYING TO GET AROUND, PEOPLE
WHO WERE TRAPPED IN THEIR
HOMES HAD TO BE RESCUED BY
FIRE CREWS WHO WENT AROUND
THE NEIGHBORHOODS IN RESCUE
BOATS.
ONE OF THOSE BOATS CAPSIZED
AND TWO OF THE PEOPLE WHO
WERE STILL MISSING HAD BEEN
IN THAT BOAT.
TODAY THE WATERS HAD RECEDED,
MOSTLY.
HI GONE AROUND AND TALKED TO
SOME.
PEOPLE IN THE NEIGHBORHOODS.
THEY WERE DEALING WITH
TRYING TO REPAIR THEIR HOMES,
CLEAN THEM OUT, GET
INSURANCE ADJUSTERS IN.
THEY WERE STILL TRYING TO
SURVEY THE DAMAGE AND FIGURE
OUT HOW MANY HOMES WERE
DAMAGED.
BUT CERTAINLY THOUSANDS IN
HOUSTON AREA ALONE.
>> Woodruff: I KNOW THERE
HAVE BEEN SOME TERRIBLE AND
REALLY HARROWING STORIES.
YOU'VE BEEN OUT, AS YOU SAID,
YOU HAVE BEEN TALKING TO
PEOPLE.
TELL US ABOUT WHAT YOU HAVE
BEEN LEARNING.
>> WELL, I SPOKE WITH THE
FATHER OF A LONE SURVIVOR OF
A GROUP IN WIMBERLY, TEXAS,
IN THE CENTRAL TEXAS HILL
COUNTRY.
HE AND HIS WIFE INCLUDING
TWO YOUNG CHILDREN HAD BEEN
VACATIONING WITH FRIENDS
OVER THE HOLIDAY WEEKEND
WHEN LATE SATURDAY NIGHT
FLOODWATERS FROM THE BLANCO
RIVER THAT YOU HAD MENTIONED
CARRIED AWAY THE HOUSE THAT
THEY WERE IN.
HE MANAGED TO SWIM TO A BANK
AND CRAWL TO SAFETY.
HE HAS A BROKEN STERNUM,
COLLAPSED LUNG, BROKEN RIB.
HE IS RECOVERING IN THE
HOSPITAL.
BUT THE REST OF THEIR GROUP,
EIGHT PEOPLE, INCLUDING
THREE CHILDREN, STILL
HAVEN'T BEEN FOUND.
THEY SAY THAT THERE IS NO
SIGN OF THEM THUS FAR.
BUT OFFICIALS SAND FAMILY
AND FRIENDS ARE STILL
SEARCHING.
>> Woodruff: SO THERE'S
STILL ACTIVE SEARCHES UNDER
WAY.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IN THAT AREA OF CENTRAL
TEXAS.
>> SO HOW ARE AUTHORITIES
PREPARING.
BECAUSE I KNOW THE FORECAST
IS FOR MORE RAIN.
WHAT ARE THEY TELLING
PEOPLE?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
I MEAN WE HAD MORE RAIN
TODAY IN HOUSTON.
THUNDERSTORMS THIS MORNING,
A LOT OF PEOPLE AWOKE TO AND
WERE CONCERNED.
HOWEVER THAT RAIN MOVED
MOSTLY FELL IN AREAS THAT
HADN'T SEEN FLOODING OVER
THE WEEKEND.
AND SO BY THIS AFTERNOON,
THE SUN WAS OUT.
AND A LOT OF THE PEOPLE WHO
HAD HAD THE FLOODING, LIKE I
SAID, WERE STILL CLEANING
UP.
BUT THE OFFICIALS HAVE SAID
TO WATCH FOR THE POTENTIAL
FOR FURTHER FLOODING BECAUSE
THE GROUND IS SO SATURATED.
IN PARTICULAR, THEY'RE
WATCHING THE RIVERS IN THE
HOUSTON AREA AND WARNING
SOME RESIDENTS WHO LIVE ON
ONE OF THE RIVERS THAT THEY
MIGHT WANT TO LEAVE THE AREA
BECAUSE THERE IS A POTENTIAL
FOR FLOODING.
>> Woodruff: HOW MOLLY
HENNESSY-FISK, WE KNOW YOU
ARE IN HOUSTON, BUT AS WE
SAID IN THAT REPORT A MOMENT
AGO, THAT DAM THAT WAS
POSING A THREAT OF
OVERFLOWING, OVERRUNNING ITS
BANKS, THEY WERE ABLE TO
STAVE THAT OFF.
IS THAT THREAT NOW STOPPED?
WE KNOW THAT IS CLOSER TO
DALLAS.
>> WELL, THAT'S TRUE.
THAT'S UP IN MIDLOTHIAN BUT
I CALLED UP THERE AND SPOKE
WITH THE OFFICIALS.
AND THEY SAID THE THREAT
SEEMED TO HAVE GONE DOWN,
ALONG WITH THE WATER.
THAT THAT THEY HAD BEEN
PUMPING THE WATER O OUT AND
IT SEEMED LIKE THE CONCERN
THEY HAD IN THE MORNING.
SOME PEOPLE THOUGHT THERE
WERE MANDATORY HE
VAG-- EVACUATIONS.
OFFICIALS TOLD ME THEY
WEREN'T MANDATORY THAT THEY
JUST WARNED PEOPLE THAT
THERE MIGHT BE WATER
OVERTOPPING THE DAM.
THAT DIDN'T END UP HAPPENING
AND THEY FELT LIKE THEY HAD
IT UNDER CONTROL BY THIS
AFTERNOON.
>> Woodruff: FOR PEOPLE
WITHOUT DONE KNOW THAT AREA,
I KNOW HOUSTON IS CALLED THE
BAYOU CITY THERE IS A LOT OF
FLOODPLAIN AROUND THERE.
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE PEOPLE
LIVING EITHER IN A
FLOODPLAIN OR CLOSE TO A
FLOODPLAIN THERE?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, IT'S
INTERESTING.
I WENT OUT TO A NEIGHBORHOOD,
ONE OF THE ONES HARDEST HIT
IN HOUSTON, YESTERDAY,
MIRELAND AND TALKED TO SOME
OF THE PEOPLE THERE WAS ONE
FAMILY WHO HAD LIVED FACING
A BAYOU, SO THEY SAID
OBVIOUSLY WE KNOW, WE FACE
THE BAYOU, THAT THIS COULD
BE A RISK BUT THEY HAD LIVED
THERE EIGHT YEARS AND HAD
NEVER HAD WATER COME INTO
THEIR HOME.
THEIR HOME WAS COMPLETELY
FLOODED.
SEVERAL FEET OF WATER.
STILL STANDING WATER
YESTERDAY.
ANOTHER FAMILY THAT I TALKED
TO, THEY WERE SEVERAL BLOCKS
AWAY, NOT EVEN WITHIN SIGHT
OF THE WATER, THEY HAD BEEN
IN THEIR HOME FOR 27 YEARS,
THEY BUILT THEIR HOME
ELEVATED IT ABOUT THREE FEET
OFFER THE GROUND, ALL BRICK.
AND IT HADN'T FLOODED IN 27
YEARS.
AND IT FLOODED THIS TIME.
THEY HAD ABOUT A FOOT OF
WATER.
>> Woodruff: IT HAS TO BE A
NIGHTMARE FOR FOLKS IN THAT
SITUATION.
ALREADY THERE IS SOME
CONVERSATION AROUND WHETHER
MORE SHOULD HAVE BEEN DONE
BY THE CITY, BY THE STATE TO
PREPARE FOR SOMETHING LIKE
THIS I KNOW WE'RE STILL
EARLY IN THIS.
ARE YOU HEARING ANYTHING
ABOUT THAT FROM CITY OR
STATE OFFICIALS?
>> WELL, I TALKED TO
RESIDENTS ABOUT THAT.
AND THERE WERE SOME
RESIDENTS WHO WERE
FRUSTRATED BECAUSE THEY SAID,
LIKE THE FAMILY I MENTIONED
TO YOU WHO LIVE ON THE BAYOU
WHO SAID THEY CALLED
891-- 911.
THEY SAW RESCUE BOATS BUT
THEY FELT LIKE THEY DIDN'T
GET ANY IMMEDIATE HELP.
I ALSO TALKED TO RES DECHBLTS
IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD WHO SAID
THEY SAW THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
BUSY RESCUING ELDERLY
RESIDENTS IN THOSE SAME
BOATS.
WHEN I TALKED TO THE CITY
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS FOLKS
AND THE COUNTY, THEY ARE
STILL WORKING, THEY ARE
STILL IN EMERGENCY MODE
TRYING TO ASSESS THE DAMAGE,
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW
MANY HOMES ARE DAMAGED AND
RESPOND.
SO I THINK IT'S SORT OF AN
ONGOING SITUATION.
WE'LL PROBABLY LEARN MORE
ABOUT THAT IN THE DAYS
AHEAD.
>> Woodruff: AND AS WE SAID,
THE FORECAST IS FOR MORE
RAIN.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND I SPOKE WITH SOME OF THE
FORECASTERS ABOUT THAT,
TRYING TO GET A BETTER IDEA.
THEY SAID MORE STORMS ARE
EXPECTED.
THIS IS SUMMER STORM SEASON
HERE.
BUT THEY WEREN'T QUITE SURE
WHERE THE STORMS WOULD POP
UP OR HOW MUCH RAIN THEY
WOULD DUMP.
AND WITH THE GROUND SO
SATURATED, THAT REALLY IS
THE QUESTION, WHETHER IT'S
GOING TO HIT AREAS THAT HAVE
ALREADY FLOODED AND CAN'T
TAKE MORE RAIN.
>> Woodruff: MOLLY HENNESSY-FISK
WE THANK YOU FOR YOUR
REPORTING WITH THE LOS
ANGELES TIMES BASED IN
HOUSTON.
THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: THE U.N. SAYS BETWEEN
10,000 AND 20,000 MIGRANTS MAY
DIE CROSSING THE MEDITERRANEAN
THIS SUMMER IN SEARCH OF SAFETY
AND A BETTER LIFE.
MANY ARE FLEEING THE WAR IN
SYRIA, A CONFLICT THAT'S CREATED
NEARLY FOUR MILLION REFUGEES.
TONIGHT, WE FOCUS ON THE STORY
OF ONE OF THOSE SYRIANS, WHO
DOCUMENTED HER RECENT RESCUE ON
HER SMARTPHONE.
GERAINT VINCENT OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS' HAS THE STORY.
>> A DRIFT IN THE DEAD OF
NIGHT, 24 SYRIAN REFUGEES
LOOK OUT FROM THEIR LITTLE
BOAT, ACROSS THE
MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
IN THE DARKNESS, THEY CAN
SEE TWO LIGHTS.
ONE OF THEM IS THE MOON.
THE OTHER SITTING ON THE
HORIZON.
>> THEY ARGUE ABOUT WHAT THE
LIGHT IS.
IS IT ON LAND OR IS IT A
COAST GUARD BOAT O ON ITS
WAY TO RESCUE THEM.
THE REFUGEES WHISTLE AND
HOLD UP THEIR MOBILE PHONES
TO ATTRACT ATTENTION.
AND THE LIGHT GETS GRADUALLY
CLOSER.
IT IS A BOAT.
BUT THEY DON'T KNOW WHOSE'S
ON BOARD.
ONE OF THE SYRIANS SPEAKS
UP.
MY WIFE SPEAKS ENGLISH, HE
SAYS.
LET HER CALL OUT TO THEM.
AND SO SHE DOES.
>> HEY, WE NEED HELP HERE.
HELLO.
WE NEED SOME HELP HERE.
>> FM BEROHIND THE LIGHT, A
VOICE SHOUTS BACK.
>> IT IS THE GREEK COAST
GUARD.
TELLING THEM TO WAIT ON
BOARD UNTIL THEY COME ALONG
SIDE.
TO PICK THEM UP.
>> ALL RIGHT, WE WILL.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THE WOMAN'S VOICE
BELONGED TO ALL IIA HAWAJI.
THREE WEEKS SINCE SHE AND
HER PARTNER MOHAMMED WERE
STRANDED AT SEA.
I MELT UP WITH THEM, AND ALL
IIA TOLD ME ABOUT THEIR
VOYAGE.
>> I TOOK A BOAT, SMALL BOAT
FROM TURKEY TO GREECE, UP TO
THE-- THE MOTOR OF THE BOAT
GOT BROKEN SO WE STOPPED IN
THE MIDDLE OF THE SEA FOR AN
HOUR AND A HALF, I MEAN UP
TO ONE HOUR AND HALF AND FOR
AROUND HALF AN HOUR, WE WERE
JUST IN THE DARKNESS IN THE
SEA, THE WAVES WAS MOVING US,
YOU KNOW, IN ALL DIRECTIONS.
IT WAS REALLY SCARY MOMENT.
BECAUSE YOU DON'T KNOW, LIKE,
I MEAN, WE BEFORE WE HEARD
THERE ARE ALSO SOME MAFIAS
IN THE SEA AND MAYBE
STOPPING PEOPLE, STEALING
THEIR STUFF, MAYBE DESTROYING
BOATS.
SO WE DIDN'T KNOW WHAT WAS
WAITING FOR US.
>> WE ARE 24 PEOPLE.
YES, EXACTLY.
>> THE COAST GUARD TOOK ALL
THE REFUGEES ON BOARD THEIR
BOAT AND AT DAWN BROKE, THEY
WERE SPEEDING TOWARDS PORT
IN THE GREEK ISLANDS.
>> WHEN YOU SEE THESE PEOPLE,
LIKE, YOU KNOW, AS THEY SAVE
OUR LIFE.
WE WERE SO HAPPY, OF COURSE,
YEAH.
>> I CAN'T EXPLAIN, I CAN'T
DESCRIBE THAT MOMENT.
IT'S LIKE, YOU KNOW IN THAT
MOMENT, YOU REALIZE THAT YOU
WERE RESCUED FROM DEATH.
>> Reporter: AT THE END OF
THEIR BOAT JOURNEY, ALIYA
AND MOHAMMED STILL HAVE A
LONG WAY TO GO TO SEEK AND
FIND ASYLUM, BUT THEY HAVE
SEEN ANOTHER SUNRISE AND
MADE IT SAFELY ACROSS THE
SEA.
>> Woodruff: MOST HIGH SCHOOLS
OFFER SOME AMOUNT OF ADVANCED
PLACEMENT COURSES, DESIGNED TO
BE MORE CHALLENGING FOR
STUDENTS, WHILE ALLOWING THEM TO
POTENTIALLY EARN COLLEGE CREDIT.
WHILE MORE HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
ARE TAKING A.P. COURSES THAN
EVER BEFORE, THE AMOUNT OF
DIVERSITY IN THOSE CLASSES
HASN'T KEPT PACE.
FROM WTTW IN CHICAGO, BRANDIS
FRIEDMAN REPORTS ON WHAT ONE
HIGH SCHOOL IS DOING TO MAKE
SURE STUDENTS AREN'T LEFT
BEHIND.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS HERE AT
EVANSTON TOWNSHIP HIGH SCHOOL
OUTSIDE CHICAGO CAN TAKE
ANYTHING FROM AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE
EXCELLENCE CERTIFICATION TO
ASTROPHYSICS.
THEY ALSO HAVE THEIR PICK OF
ALMOST 30 ADVANCED PLACEMENT
COURSES.
DALE LIEBFORTH HEADS A.P.
RECRUITMENT.
>> PORTFOLIO STUDIO, OR LATIN.
THE LIST GOES ON.
WE JUST ADDED AN A.P. GOVERNMENT
COURSE.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH IT'S A
TOP-RATED SCHOOL, WITH A DERSEIV
STUDENT BODY, UNTIL RECENTLY
ONLY CERTAIN STUDENTS WERE
PICKING A.P. COURSES.
>> WE HAVE STUDENTS OF COLOR,
LOW-INCOME STUDENTS TERRIBLY
UNDERREPRESENTED IN AP.
THERE'S STILL A PREDICTABILITY
AMONG STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT IN OUR
SCHOOL DISTRICT BASED ON RACE.
>> Reporter: WHEN ERIC
WITHERSPOO BECONAME
SUPERINTENDENT EIGHT YEARS AGO,
HE NOTICED THAT A.P. CLASSROOMS
WERE FILLED WITH MOSTLY WHITE
STUDENTS.
WHILE REGULAR CLASSROOMS, WERE
FILLED WITH MOSTLY MINORITY, AND
OFTEN LOW-INCOME STUDENTS, WHO
MAKE UP 41% OF THE STUDENT BODY.
WITHERSPOON SAYS HE REALIZED
STUDENTS WERE BEING TRACKED INTO
A.P. COURSES THROUGH HONORS
CLASSES BASED ON THEIR EIGHTH
GRADE STANDARDIZED TEST
PERFORMANCE, WHILE OTHER
STUDENTS WERE TRACKED INTO LESS
RIGOROUS COURSES.
>> IT DIDN'T TAKE ROCKET
SCIENTIST TO FIGURE OUT THAT
HERE WE'RE GETTING DISPARATE
RESULTS BUT IN FACT, WE HAVE A
STRUCTURE THAT MAY BE EVEN
CAUSING THOSE DISPARATE RESULTS,
CERTAINLY IF NOT CAUSING, NOT
DOING ANYTHING TO CHANGE THOSE
RESULTS.
>> Reporter: TO BRIDGE THAT GAP,
EVANSTON TOWNSHIP HIGH SCHOOL
STARTED ENROLLING ALL INCOMING
FRESHMEN IN THE HONORS ENGLISH
AND HISTORY COURSE, CALLED
HUMANITIES.
EVENTUALLY, ALL NINTH GRADE
STUDENTS, EXCEPT FOR THOSE
READING BELOW GRADE LEVEL, WERE
ENROLLED IN THE HONORS LEVEL
BIOLOGY CLASSES AS WELL, NO
MATTER HOW THEY DID ON THEIR
EIGHTH GRADE STANDARDIZED TEST.
THE SCHOOL PLANS THE SAME
STRATEGY FOR NINTH GRADE MATH.
>> WE PUT A LOT OF WORK INTO
CONVINCING STUDENTS THAT THIS IS
SOMETHING EVERYONE CAN DO.
THIS IS WHERE YOU BELONG.
WHERE YOU HAVE SHOWN YOU CAN
SHOW RESILIENCE, GRIT, HARD WORK
AND EFFORT IT TAKES TO BE
SUCCESSFUL.
>> WHICH ONE OF THESE GENERATES
MORE VOLUME?
>> Reporter: THE IDEA IS TO SET
HIGHER EXPECTATIONS OF ALL
STUDENTS EARLY, SO THAT MORE OF
THEM ARE PREPARED FOR AN A.P.
CLASS BY ELEVENTH GRADE.
BUT THE WORK DIDN'T STOP THERE.
>> THE RECRUITMENT, ACCESS,
STRIPPING AWAY BARRIERS, WE'VE
DONE THAT.
WE'VE DONE THE EASY PART, NOW
IT'S HOW CAN YOU BE SUCCESSFUL?
WE'VE INSTITUTED A SERIES OF
SUPPORTS FOR THE KIDS.
>> Reporter: THE SCHOOL
DEVELOPED WAYS TO BE SURE
STUDENTS WHO ENROLLED IN HONORS,
AND ENTUEVALLY ADVANCED
PLACEMENT CLASSES, DIDN'T FAIL.
>> WHAT CAN WE DO, WHAT DO YOU
THINK WE SHOULD DO TO MAKE THAT
EXPERIENCE BETTER?
>> Reporter: ONE OF THEM IS A
PROGRAM CALLED TEAM ACCESS AND
SUCCESS IN ADVANCED PLACEMENT,
OR TEAM A.S.A.P.-- IT'S A
SUPPORT GROUP FOR A.P. STUDENTS.
>> IT'S KIND OF LIKE A STRESS
RELIEVER.
WHENEVER I'M HAVING AN ISSUE IN
MY CLASSES I COME HERE, TALK
ABOUT IT, TO OTHER STUDENTS WHO
MIGHT BE HAVING SAME ISSUES.
>> IT'S A GREAT WAY TO GET A.P.
STUDY STRATEGIES, AND I KNOW I
PLAN ON TAKING A.P. CLASSES NEXT
YEAR.
>> Reporter: SENIOR JONATHAN
SENECAL SAYS BLACK MALE STUDENTS
ARE OFTEN STILL UNDERREPSENTED.
BUT HE SAYS THIS PUSH TO
DIVERSIFY A.P. CLASSES IS MAKING
A NOTICEABLE DIFFERENCE.
>> AP IS TRADITIONALLY KIND OF A
WHITE SPACE, BUT, LIKE IN RECENT
YEARS, WE'VE SEEN IT CHANGE A
WHOLE LOT.
IN MY STATS CLASS, EVERYONE'S
WELL-REPRESENTED.
HELPS THAT PEOPLE HAVE DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVES, DIFFERENT
ANALOGIES BRINGING DIFFERENT
THINGS TO THE TABLE AND EVERYONE
IMPROVES BECAUSE OF THAT.
>> Reporter: THE DISTRICT SAYS
EARLY NUMBERS SHOW THE CHANGES
IT'S MADE ARE MAKING A POSITIVE
DIFFERENCE FOR ALL STUDENTS.
BETWEEN 2011 AND 2014 ALONE, THE
NUMBER OF STUDENTS TAKING THE
A.P. EXAM IS UP 30%.
WHITE STUDENTS SHOWED A 19%
INCREASE, BLACK STUDENTS TAKING
A.P. TESTS ARE UP 35%, AND
LATINO STUDENTS SHOWED THE MOST
GROWTH, UP 78% IN THOSE THREE
YEARS.
NOT ONLY ARE MORE STUDENTS
TAKING A.P. TESTS, BUT THE
NUMBER OF STUDENTS SCORING A
THREE OR HIGHER-- A SCORE THAT
CAN LEAD TO COLLEGE CREDIT-- IS
UP TOO.
FOR WHITE STUDENTS, IT'S UP BY
31%, BLACK STUDENTS BY 98%, AND
LATINO STUDENTS UP BY A WHOPPING
116%.
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
PROFESSOR AND RESEARCHER DAVID
FIGLIO IS ALSO AN EVANSTON HIGH
SCHOOL PARENT.
HE'S VOLUNTEERING HIS RESEARCH
EXPERTISE TO STUDY IF AND HOW
WELL THESE CHANGES ARE WORKING.
>> EVANSTON HIGH HAS A FORMULA
IN SOME REGARDS FOR SUCCESS FO
RTHE ADVANTAGED KIDS.
ANY MONKEYING AROUND WITH THAT
FORMULA COULD BE RISKY.
AT THE SAME TIME, IT COULD PAY
OFF IN BIG WAYS.
SO WE NEED TO KNOW HOW
SUCCESSFUL THE STUDENTS WHO
WOULD'VE BEEN IN A.P./HONORS
CLASSES ANYWAY, AS WELL AS
SUCCESS OF THOSE WHO WOULDN'T
HAVE BEEN IN THE HONORS CLASSES
HAD THIS NOT BEEN HAPPENING.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS SAY THAT
WHILE THEY APPRECIATE THE
INCREASED NUMBER OF STUDENTS OF
COLOR, WHEN THEY ARE IN CLASS,
THEY SHOULD HAVE JUST ONE FOCUS.
>> I FEEL LIKE THERE ARE CLASSES
THAT ARE MORE DIVERSE THAN OTHER
CLASSES, BUT IT'S NOT SOMETHING
YOU SHOULD PAY ATTENTION TO IF
IT'S WHAT YOU WANT, GO AFTER IT.
>> Reporter: FIGLIO ADDS THAT A
COMMUNITY LIKE EVANSTON IS IDEAL
PLACE TO TEST THIS MODEL-- IT'S
RICH IN DIVERSITY, RESOURCES AND
THE WILL TO MAKE A CHANGE-- A
CHANGE THAT EDUCATORS HOPE COULD
BE REPLICATED IN OTHER
DISTRICTS.
I'M BRANDIS FRIEDMAN REPORTING
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR FROM
CHICAGO.
>> Ifill: WE TURN NOW TO MOROCCO
AND A STORY ABOUT A GOVERNMENT
RULING THAT HAS LEFT MANY
CHILDREN WITHOUT FAMILIES.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KIRA KAY
REPORTS.
HER STORY IS PRODUCED IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE BUREAU FOR
INTERNATIONAL REPORTING.
>> Reporter: IT'S NOON ON A
SCHOOL DAY IN FES, MOROCCO AND
THESE CHILDREN ARE HOME FOR
LUNCH.
THEY'RE A ROWDY BUNCH, 138 IN
ALL, RANGING IN AGE FROM FIVE TO
15.
LATER IN THE DAY, THEY'LL DO
THEIR HOMEWORK, PLAY SOME BALL,
CLEAN THEIR ROOMS.
NORMAL ROUTINE IN MOST
HOUSEHOLDS, BUT THESE ARE
ORPHANS, SOME OF THE ESTIMATED
24 CHILDREN ABANDONED EVERY DAY
IN MOROCCO.
NADIA BENNIS IS THIS ORPHANAGE'S
DIRECTOR.
DIRECTOR. >> (
translated): MOROCCAN
>> (translated):
MOROCCAN SOCIETY DOES NOT ACCEPT
UNWED
SOCIETY DOES NOT ACCEPT UNWED
MOTHERS, SO MANY PREFER TO GET
RID OF THE CHILD AT BIRTH.
FOR THE CHILDREN WE FIND WHO ARE
OLDER THAN AGE TWO, WE BELIEVE
THEIR MOTHERS TRIED TO KEEP
THEIR BABIES WITH THEM, BUT
BECAUSE THEY ARE REJECTED BY
THEIR FAMILIES AND ARE UNABLE TO
FIND A JOB, THEY DECIDED TO
ABANDON THE CHILD.
>> Reporter: THE CHILDREN HERE
ARE CLEARLY WELL CARED FOR.
THEY HAVE TUTORS TO HELP THEM
WITH HOMEWORK AND SEVERAL NURSES
WHO RUN DAILY LIFE ALMOST AS A
MOTHER WOULD.
BUT BENNIS SAYS, CONCERNS
BENEATH THE SURFACE NEED
TENDING.
TENDING. >> (translated
): WE TRY WITH
>> (translated): WE TRY
WITH THE PSYCHOLOGISTS TO HANDLE
THE PSYCHOLOGISTS TO HANDLE
CERTAIN PROBLEMS, A LOT OF WORK
IS REQUIRED TO CONVINCE THE
CHILD THAT HE'S NOT WORTHLESS,
THAT THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO LOVE
HIM.
ALSO SPEECH THERAPY: IN AN
INSTITUTION, THE CHILDREN HAVE
FEWER CHANCES TO EXPRESS
THEMSELVES, SO THEIR LANGUAGE
SKILLS ARE POOR.
>> Reporter: THE LONG TERM GOAL
OF THIS ORPHANAGE IS TO FIND
THESE CHILDREN PERMANENT HOMES.
BUT THAT'S NOT SO SIMPLE HERE IN
MOROCCO.
MOROCCO, AS A MUSLIM COUNTRY,
DOESN'T PERMIT TRADITIONAL
ADOPTION.
INSTEAD, THERE IS AN ALTERNATIVE
SYSTEM, CALLED KAFALA,
TRANSLATED AS CUSTODY OR
GUARDIANSHIP THAT CAN LAST UNTIL
THE CHILD TURNS 18.
THE CHILD TURNS 18. >> (
translated): KAFALA IS
>> (translated): KAFALA
IS JUST THE CARETAKEING OF A
CHILD
JUST THE CARETAKEING OF A CHILD
BY ADOPTIVE RENTPAS.
>> Reporter: ASMAA BENSLIMANE
ADVOCATES ON BEHALF OF MOROCCAN
ORPHANS.
ORPHANS. >> (translated
): IN ADOPTION,
>> (translated): IN
ADOPTION, THEY BECOME LIKE A
BIOLOGICAL
THEY BECOME LIKE A BIOLOGICAL
CHILD, THAT'S TO SAY AN ACTUAL
CHILD OF THE FAMILY, WITH RIGHTS
OF NAME, AND GHTSRI OF
INHERITANCE, EVERYTHING.
WHY DOES ISLAM FORBID ADOPTION?
TO AVOID THE MIXING OF GENES,
FOR EXAMPLE A BROTHER MARRYING
HIS SISTER WITHOUT KNOWING IT.>T
OF KAFALA IS THAT CHILDREN'S
ORIGINAL IDENTITY BE MAINTAINED,
INCLUDING THEIR RELIGION.
INCLUDING THEIR RELIGION. >> (
translated): IN KAFALA
IT
>> (translated): IN
KAFALA IT IS REQUIRED THAT THE
ADOPTIVE
IS REQUIRED THAT THE ADOPTIVE
PARENTS MUST BE MUSLIM.
THAT'S THE MAIN POINT.
AND IN FACT THEY MUST ASSURE
THAT WHEN HE GROWS HE KEEPS HIS
RELIGION AND HIS CULTURE.
>> Reporter: MOROCCO WAS ONE OF
ONLY A FEW MUSLIM COUNTRIES THAT
ALLOWED FOREIGNERS TO COME AND
UNDERTAKE KAFALA-- 50% OF
KAFALAS DONE IN MOROCCO BEFORE
2012 WERE INTERNATIONAL.
FAMILIES THAT WERE NOT ALREADY
MUSLIM CONVERTED, A JUDGE
DETERMINED WHETHER OR NOT THEY
HAD TRULY EMBRACED ISLAM.
HAD TRULY EMBRACED ISLAM. >> (
translated): THIS IS
>> (translated): THIS
IS KHALIL, THIS IS AMRAN.
KHALIL, THIS IS AMRAN.
THEIR PARENTS ABANDONED THEM AT
THE HOSPITAL.
THE JUDGE CALLED US TO TAKE
THEM.
>> Reporter: KHADIJA BOUEBAIDI
RUNS AN ORPHANAGE IN TANGIER,
WHERE SHE INTRODUCED US TO HER
YOUNG CHARGES-- 12, 13 EVEN ONLY
EIGHT DAYS OLD.
BOUEBAIDI USED TO HOST FAMILIES
FROM EUROPE AND THE UNITED
STATES FOR KAFALAS.
THE FAMILIES STAYING A COUPLE OF
WEEKS AT A TIME.
BUT IN SEPTEMBER 2012, A
RECENTLY-ELECTED ISLAMIST
GOVERNMENT ISSUED A STUNNING
ANNOUNCEMENT, KNOWN AS THE
"CIRCULAR."
IT REQUIRED MOROCCAN PROSECUTORS
TO INVESTIGATE THE BACKGROUNDS
OF KAFALA APPLICANTS, AND TO
DENY KAFALA TO ALL FOREIGNERS
WHO WERE NOT REGULAR RESIDENTS
OF MOROCCO, TO STOP SUSPECTED
CONVERSIONS TO CHRISTIANITY ONCE
CHILDREN LEFT THE COUNTRY.
CHILDREN LEFT THE COUNTRY. >> (
translated): WHEN THE
>> (translated): WHEN
THE CIRCULAR CAME OUT, WE
ATTEMPTED
CIRCULAR CAME OUT, WE ATTEMPTED
TO UNDERSTAND WHY.
AND WE WENT WITH OTHER
ASSOCIATIONS TO SEE THE
MINISTER.
HE EXPLAINED TO US THAT HE
CHILDREN OF MOROCCO, WHEN THEY
WERE TAKEN INTO FOREIGN KAFALA,
THEY WERE ABUSED, THEY HAD THEIR
RELIGION AND IDENTITY CHANGED.
VOILA, THAT WAS IT.
>> (translated): WE HAD
CHILDREN THAT FOREIGN FAMILIES
WANTED.
THEN THE CIRCULAR WAS ISSUED AND
THEIR KAFALA WAS STOPPED.
IT WAS A SHOCK FOR OUR
INSTITUTION BUT OF COURSE ALSO A
SHOCK FOR THE FAMILIES.
THEY WOULD SIT AND CRY AND SAY,
"WHY WON'T THEY GIVE THEM TO
US?"
>> Reporter: MOROCCAN TELEVISION
CHRONICLED THE STRUGGLE OF THESE
FOREIGN PARENTS WHO FOUND
THEMSELVES CAUGHT IN MOROCCO,
THEIR SOON-TO-BE CHILDREN STILL
IN ORPHANAGES, UNABLE TO LEAVE;
THE PARENTS FORCED TO RENT
APARTMENTS NEARBY, UNSURE HOW
LONG THEY'D BE STAYING.
MOROCCAN LAWYER NADIA MOUHIR
JOINED THEIR FIGHT.
JOINED THEIR FIGHT. >> (
translated): THEY WERE
>> (translated):
THEY WERE BLOCKED.
BLOCKED.
THERE WERE DOZENS OF FAMILIES IN
RABAT, AGADIR, MARRAKECH,
CASABLANCA.
THE PROSECUTORS REFUSED TO GIVE
THEIR APPROVAL.
THE JUDGES COULDN'T GRANT THE
KAFALA AFTER THE CIRCULAR.
>> Reporter: WITH ORPHANAGES
OVERFLOWING, MOUHIR AND HER
FELLOW ADVOCATES FOUGHT THE
CIRCULAR.
IT TOOK MORE THAN A YEAR, BUT
MOST FAMILIES LEFT MOROCCO WITH
THEIR CHILDREN BY THE END OF
2013.
COURTS HAVE SINCE DECLARED THE
CIRCULAR CONTRADICTS NATIONAL
LAW.
BUT THE DAMAGE HAS BEEN DONE
SAYS MOUHIR.
SAYS MOUHIR. >> (
translated): PEOPLE ARE
>> (translated): PEOPLE
ARE AFRAID TO START A KAFALA,
AFRAID
AFRAID TO START A KAFALA, AFRAID
OF JUDGES WHO WOULD STILL APPLY
THE CIRCULAR.
IN RABAT WE HAVE ONLY THREE OR
FOUR FAMILIES, WHEN WE USED TO
HAVE 30 OR 40 DURING THE SAME
PERIOD.
EVEN WORSE, FOREIGN AUTHORITIES
NO LONGER WANT TO GRANT
PERMISSION FOR THEM TO COME TO
MOROCCO.
>> Reporter: SEVERAL AMERICAN
ADOPTION AGENCIES CONFIRMED TO
PBS NEWSHOUR, THEY NO LONGER
RISK DOING KAFALAS IN MOROCCO.
THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE DID NOT
ACCEPT OUR REQUESTS FOR AN
INTERVIEW.
INTERVIEW. >> (
translated): IT WAS A
>> (translated): IT WAS
A FEELING OF INDIGNATION,ECAU
BSE
FEELING OF INDIGNATION,ECAU BSE
WE KNOW WHAT DAILY LIFE IS FOR
THESE CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: ORPHANAGE DIRECTOR
NADIA BENNIS HAS SEEN NEARLY ALL
INTERNATIONAL KAFALAS VANISH.
AND SHE SAYS SOME CHILDREN HAVE
NOW LIKELY AGED OUT-- THE BAD
LUCK OF BEING BORN DURING THE
PERIOD OF THE CIRCULAR.
PERIOD OF THE CIRCULAR. >> (
translated): WE KNOW
THAT
>> (translated): WE
KNOW THAT AT BIRTH AND EVEN
DURING THEIR
AT BIRTH AND EVEN DURING THEIR
FIRST YEAR, A CHILD HAS A MUCH
GREATER CHANCE OF LEAVING
THROUGH KAFALA THAN A CHILD WHO
IS OLDER THAN THREE.
EACH DAY THAT A CHILD STAYS IN
AN INSTITUTION LESSENS THEIR
CHANCES FOR KAFALA.
>> Reporter: LAWYER NADIA MOUHIR
IS WORKING HARD TO GET MOROCCANS
THEMSELVES TO UNDERTAKE KAFALA,
LIKE NEZHA BICHERATE, WHO IS IN
THE PROCESS OF BRINGING SIX-
MONTH-OLD ISMAEL INTO HER HOME.
BUT THE NUMBERS OF MOROCCAN
NOT ENOUGH.ILE GROWING, ARE
AND STIGMAS REMAIN, PARTICULARLY
ABOUT SPECIAL NEEDS CHILDREN,
ANOTHER CASUALTY OF THE
CIRCULAR, SINCE FOREIGNERS HAD
BEEN MORE WILLING AND ABLE TO
TAKE ON THE ADDITIONAL CARE.
TAKE ON THE ADDITIONAL CARE. >>
(translated): THIS IS
NEW
>> (translated): THIS
IS NEW FOR ME, I HAVEN'T DEALT
WITH SO
FOR ME, I HAVEN'T DEALT WITH SO
MANY HANDICAPPED CHILDREN
BEFORE.
I'M NOT SURE WHAT TO DO.
I'M NOT SURE WHAT TO DO. >> (
translated): ISLAM IS
NOT
>> (translated): ISLAM
IS NOT ABOUT INTERVENING IN THE
BELIEFS
ABOUT INTERVENING IN THE BELIEFS
OF THESE PEOPLE THAT ARE RAISING
CHILDREN.
ON THE CONTRARY, WE NEED TO SEE
WHAT THE INTEREST OF THE
CHILDREN IS.
AND THAT INTEREST IS FOR THEM TO
HAVE FAMILIES TO GIVE THEM LOVE,
TO GIVE THEM CULTURE AND TO LET
THEM BE SOMETHING IN SOCIETY.
>> Reporter: ONE MOROCCAN
ORPHANAGE IS NAVIGATING THE NEW
LANDSCAPE FOR FOREIGN KAFALAS.
ITS INFLUENTIAL DIRECTOR, RITA
ZNIBER, INSISTS PAREN PROTSVIDE
FOLLOW UP REPORTS ON THEIR
CHILDRENS' CULTURAL AND
RELIGIOUS UPBRINGING.
AND SHE ENSURES THE DOSSIERS SHE
DELIVERS TO THE JUDGES ARE WHAT
THEY ARE LOOKING FOR, WHICH
MEANS NO RECENT CONVERTS.
>> (translated): WE'VE
PREFERRED TO FOCUS ON PARENTS
WHOSE FAMILY BACKGROUND IS
MUSLIM, OR IN WHICH ONE OF THE
TWO PARENTS IS MUSLIM, IN A WAY
THAT DOES NOT PROVOKE THE
SENSITIVITIES OF ILL-INTENTIONED
PEOPLE WHO MIGHT, IN TODAY'S
CONTEXT, BLOCK THE INTERNATIONAL
KAFALA.
THIS IS DONE WITH THEIR
INTERESTS IN MIND, SO THEY ARE
NOT GIVEN FALSE HOPE.
>> Reporter: ALL THESE ORPHANAGE
DIRECTORS SAY THEY ARE EAGER TO
WORK WITH THE GOVERNMENT TO
DEVELOP A FORMAL PROCESS TO
UNDERTAKE THE KIND OF FOLLOW-UP
IBERZN HAS IMPLEMENTED ON HER
OWN AND JUMPSTART FOREIGN
KAFALAS AGAIN NATIONWIDE.
BUT SO FAR, NO EFFORTS TO CREATE
SUCH A SYSTEM HAVE MATEALIZRIED.
THIS IS KIRA KAY, FOR PBS
NEWSHOUR IN MEKNES, MOROCCO.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, AN EXPERIMENT
IN PERSONALIZED "INTANGIBLE"
ART, DIRECT FROM THE ARTIST TO A
CONSUMER LIKE YOU.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY FROM
MINNEAPOLIS.
>> I'M GOING TO HAVE YOU WALK TO
THE BRIDGE AND WHEN YOU SEE A
PERSON IN AN ORANGE SHIRT, THE
SHOW HAS BEGUN.
>> Brown: I WASN'T QUITE SURE
WHAT TO EXPECT.
I'D BEEN TOLD TO MEET WITH
PERFORMERS FROM THE DANCE GROUP
"BODY CARTOGRAPHY" AT LORING
PARK IN DOWNTOWN MINNEAPOLIS.
I THINK I'VE ARRIVED AT THE
PERFORMANCE.
BUT IT WAS ALL VERY MYSTERIOUS,
ESPECIALLY WHEN THIS MAN IN AN
ORANGE SHIRT BEGAN TO DANCE,
AND HE SEEMED TO BE DANNG JCIUST
FOR ME.
WAS I SUPPOSED TO JOIN IN?
CONFUSING ME A BIT, IT TURNED
OUT, WAS INTENTIONAL.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF PLAYING WITH
YOU AND YOUR COMFORT AND
DISCOMFORT, TO ENGAGE YOU
PHYSICALLY IN WHAT'S HAPPENING.
>> Brown: THERE IS DISCOMFORT
THERE FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE.
>> YEAH.
>> Brown: THIS PERSONAL ONE-ON-
ONE DANCE IS PART OF WHAT'S
TOUTED AS A NEW KIND OF ART
COMMERCE-- E-COMMERCE TO BE
PRECISE.
THE SELLER IS A VERY PROMINENT
MUSEUM: THE WALKER ART CENTER IN
MINNEAPOLIS.
EMMET BYRNE IS THE WALKER'S
DESIGN DIRECTOR, AND ONE OF THE
CREATORS OF THIS SO-CALLED
"INTANGIBLE" SHOPPING
EXPERIENCE.
>> IN ESSENCE, WE'RE SELLING
IDEAS.
>> Brown: IS IT A PRODUCT OR IS
IT ARTWORK?
>> WE STRUGGLED A LOT WITH THE
TERMINOLOGY THROUGHOUT ALL OF
THIS.
I THINK WHEN YOU CALL IT
ARTWORK, IT GIVES IT THE
REVERENCE IT DESERVES.
WHEN YOU CALL IT A PRODUCT, IT
HAS A CERTAIN HONESTY THAT I
REALLY LIKE.
>> Brown: THE WALKER IS ONE OF
THE NATION'S LEADING MUSEUMS FOR
CONTEMPORARY ART.
AND LIKE MUSEUMS EVERYWHERE IT
HAS A GIFT SHOP.
BUT "INTANGIBLES" IS SOMETHING
DIFFERENT, INTENDED TO ENCOURAGE
A DEEPER RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
ARTIST AND AUDIENCE.
AND EXPERIENCE SEEMS TO BE THE
MANTRA.
>> I THINK PEOPLE ARE LOOKING
FOR MORE PERSONAL EXPERIENCES
WITH ARTISTS.
I THINK THEY ARE USED TO A
MUSEUM EXPERIENCE AND THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR DIFFERENT WAYS TO
INTERACT WITH ARTISTS AND ALSO
BE A COLLABORATOR IN THE
ARTISTIC PROCESS.
> Br>own: SO, FOR EXAMPLE, YOU
COULD HAVE A PERSONAL
EXPERIENCE, VIA EMAIL, WITH NICO
MUHLY, ONE OF TODAY'S LEADING
YOUNG COMPOSERS.
FOR $150, MUHLY WOULD COMPOSE AN
ORIGINAL RINGTONE FOR YOUR
CELLPHONE, WHETHER IT'S A
"STRESSFUL FAMILY CALL" OR
"BOOTY CALL".
HIS 12 OFFERINGS WERE SO
POPULAR, THEY SOLD OUT IN JUST
DAYS, ACCORDING TO RETAIL
DIRECTOR MICHELE TOBIN.
>> WHAT IS SO SPECIAL IS THAT
FOR $150, YOU GET THIS EXCHANGE
WITH NICO MUHLY.
A PERSONAL EXCHANGE.
THAT'S A LOT OF INTERACTION WITH
AN ARTIST.
AND THEN YOU HAVE SOMETHING AT
THE END AND YOU OWN IT.
SO IT'S A PRETTY TANGIBLE
INTANGIBLE.
>> I'M ALSO TRYING TO COVER UP
THE HOLES IN THE WALL.
MONICA LARSON WAS ONE OF
"INTANGIBLES" FIRST CUSTOMERS.
SHE BOUGHT WHAT WAS ADVERTISED
AS A POTENTIAL ART EXHIBIT BY
THE DESIGN TEAM KNOWN AS
"RO/LU."
>> MAYBE THAT COULD COME INTO
THE DOORWAY A LITTLE BIT.
>> Brown: WHEN WE MET HER, THAT
EXHIBIT WAS BECOMING A REALITY
IN HER OWN LIVING ROOM.
AFTER PURCHASING A ZIP-DRIVE OF
IMAGES AND VIDEOS, SHE SELECTED
OR CURATED THE PIECES SHE WISHED
HELP OF RO/LU DESIGNER MATT
OLSON, BEGAN INSTALLING THEM.
>>I LOVE THE IDEA OF TAKING
THIS ART AND PUTTING IT OUTSIDE
THE MUSEUM ARTWORK, SHOWCASING
IT SOMEWHERE ELSE.
>> IT SEEMS LIKE THE INTERNET IS
TEACHING US THAT INSTITUTIONS
AND GALLERIES ARE GREAT.
BUT THERE'S ANOTHER LEVEL
AVAILABLE TO US TO INTERACT WITH
ART.
>> Brown: IT WAS THAT
INTERACTION WITH AN AUDIENCE
THAT ATTRACTED PHOTOGRAPHER ALEC
SOTH TO "INTANGIBLES."
NORMALLY KNOWN FOR LARGE SCALE
LANDSCAPES, HE'S RECENTLY BEGUN
EXPERIMENTING WITH HIS SMART
PHONE.
>> WATCHING MY DAUGHTER SORT OF
LIVE IN THIS WORLD WHERE A
PHOTOGRAPH IS NOT SOMETHING TO
KEEP A MEMORY, IT'S SOMETHING TO
SPEAK WITH...
>> Brown: COMMUNICATION RATHER
THAN, WHAT?
DOCUMENTING?
>> YEAH.
COMMUNICATION RATHER THAN
DOCUMENTATION.
EXACTLY.
WHICH IS THE OPPOSITE OF WHAT MY
CAREER IS BASED ON.
Bro>>wn: SOTH'S RETAIL
OFFERING, WHICH ALSO SOLD OUT
QUICKLY, WAS A SERIES OF
SNAPCHAT PHOTOS-- IMAGES THAT
DISAPPEAR JUST CONDSES AFTER
THEY ARE RECEIVED.
>> THIS WAS AN OPPORTUNITY WHERE
WITH THE WALKER, I COULD PLAY
WITH THIS TOOL AND HAVE THESE
NEW FRIENDS THAT I'M SENDING
PICTURES TO THAT DISAPPEAR.
BUT THERE WAS ONE ASPECT THAT
MADE SOTH UNCOMFORTABLE.
>> I DIDN'T WANT TO PRETEND TO
BE A CONCEPTUAL ARTIST THAT
CHARGES $10,000 FOR AN
IT'S JUST NOT WHAT I AM.
I'M A PHOTOGRAPHER AND I MAKE
PRINTS AND I UNDERSTAND THAT.
BUT I'M UNCOMFORTABLE WITH
BUYING AN EXPERIENCE.
>> Brown: AN EXPERIENCE VERSUS
AN ACTUAL PRINTED THING.
>> YEAH.
>> Brown: EVENTUALLY HE AND THE
WALKER SETTLED ON A PRICE OF
$100 FOR 25 IMAGES.
THE MONEY CHARGED FOR THE
INTANGIBLE ITEMS IS SPLIT
BETWEEN THE ARTIST AND THE
MUSEUM.
ALL NOBLE SOUNDING. BUT I HAD TO
ASK: IS THIS JUST A GIMMICK FOR
THE WALKER?
>> THE MUSEUM ALREADY DEALS WITH
INTANGIBLE EXPERIENCES EVERY
DAY.
SEEING A PERFORMANCE IS
INTANGIBLE.
EVEN WALKING THROUGH A GALLERY
THAT FEATURES TANGIBLE OBJECTS
IS AN INTANGIBLE EXPERIENCE FOR
THE VIEWER.
SO IT MADE A LOT OF SENSE FOR US
TO TRANSLATE THAT INTO OUR GIFT
SHOP.
>> Brown: BACK IN LORING PARK,
DANCERS OTTO RAMSTAD AND OLIVE
BIERINGA SAID SELLING THEIR
DANCE EXPERIENCES HAS RAISED
INTERESTING QUESTIONS.
ARE YOU COMFORTABLE WITH THE
FACT THAT YOUR ART IS BEING SOLD
IN A GIFT SHOP?
>> IT'S EXCITING AND IT'S NEW
TERRITORY.
AND YES IT BRINGS UP A VERY
INTERESTING CONVERSATION OF
"WHERE IS THE ART?"
>> HOW DO YOU PUT VALUE ON
EXPERIENCE?
>> Brown: YOU ARE COMMODIFYING
THAT EXPERIENCE.
>> WHICH IS A BEAUTIFUL IRONY
BECAUSE OUR EARLY WORK STARTED
IN RESPONSE TO ME NOT WANTING TO
BE PART OF THE ART MARKET, BUT
JUST WANTING TO MAKE DANCE IN
PUBLIC SPACES.
>> Brown: BUT HERE YOU ARE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
FULL CIRCLE.
>> Brown: AND HERE AM I, JEFFREY
BROWN, DANCING THROUGH
MINNEAPOLIS, FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR.
WITH HAVE BREAKING NEWS
DEVELOPING, U.S. MILITARY
FACILITIES IN UTAH AND
MARYLAND MISTAKENLY SENT
LIVE ANTHRAX TO PRIV AT LABS
IN NINE STATES, AND A
MILITARY BASE IN SOUTH
KOREA.
THE PENTAGON CONFIRMED SO
FAR THERE ARE NO KNOWN
INFECTIONS.
AND A SENIOR ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIAL TOLD REPORTERS THAT
THREATS BY THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP ON THE U.S. HAVE
INCREASED IN THE LAST TWO
WEEKS.
AND URGED CONGRESS TO RENEW
THE LAW AUTHORIZING
GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE
PROGRAMS.
FINALLY TONIGHT, OUR
NEWSHOUR SHARES
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, OUR
"NEWSHOUR SHARES" OF THE DAY,
SOMETHING THAT CAUGHT OUR EYE
WHICH MIGHT BE OF INTEREST TO
YOU, TOO.
JOY LOFTHOUSE IS A WORLD WAR II
VETERAN, A MEMBER OF AN ALL-
FEMALE DIVISION OF BRITISH
PILOTS CALLED THE "ATTAGIRLS,"
PART OF THE AIR TRANSPORT
AUXILIARY.
70 YEARS AFTER HER LAST FLIGHT,
THE 92-YEAR-OLD WENT BACK ABOARD
A SPITFIREIRCR AAFT EARLIER THIS
MONTH.
THE BBC WAS THERE TO CAPTURE HER
ASCENT.
>> YOU DON'T WANT ME TO ASK
YOU HOW ARE YOU FEELING, DO
YOU?
>> WELL, EXCITED BUT AWARE
OF MY AGE SO HOPING THAT
THINGS GO OKAY.
ABOUT AS CONFIDENT AS I DID
WHEN I USED TO FLY WHEN I
WAS YOUNG.
>> WHAT IS SO SPECIAL ABOUT
GOING IN A SPITFIRE?
>> IT WAS THE ICONIC PLANE,
THE NEAREST THING TO HAVING
WINGS OF YOUR OWN AND
FLYING.
IT WAS A BEAUTIFUL DAY,
COULDN'T BE A BETTER DAY.
>> WHEN YOU'RE READY, YOU
HAVE THE GO.
>>> THAT IS WHY THEY CALL
HER AN ATTAGIRL.
>> YOU HAVE TO HAND IT TO
HER.
ON THE
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, RESEARCHERS HAVE FOUND
THAT THE DRUG METHADONE, CAN
POSE A HEALTH RISK WHEN IT
FILTERS INTO OUR DRINKING WATER.
BUT UNLIKE SOME PHARMACEUTICALS
THAT CAN GET LEAKED INTO OUR
WATERWAYS, THE DANGER ISN'T FROM
THE DRUG ITSELF, BUT WHEN IT IS
COMBINED WITH A COMMON WASTE
WATER DISINFECTANT.
READ THE LATEST REPORT FROM OUR
SCIENCE TEAM, ON OUR HOME PAGE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT HOW
THE C.E.O. OF ONE OF THE
NATION'S LARGEST HEALTH INSURERS
IS TRYING TO GIVE BETTER
BENEFITS TO HIS EMPLOYEES.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.